file ownership.
In this lesson,
we will cover how files and directories are owned and how we could change the ownership off
those files and directories.
So the file ownerships are created on user level and a group level.
There are two owners off a file or directory a user,
the one who creates the file or directory.
And the 2nd 1 is a group.
The user,
the group that belongs to,
If you are if you belong to two different group and permission applies.
That second group has a read permissions.
Or it could delete a file or directory as long as you in that group,
and you would have that right command to change.
File ownership has changed Own,
which is also known as Chief Home and Change Group.
C H g R P Change own changes.
The ownership off a file changed group changes the group ownership off a file recursive
ownership changed option.
If you are using an option with change own or change group with minus upper case are,
it will not only change that directory,
but also all the files and directories within the parent directory.
If you look at the example off windows Let's say we have this full dick,
all videos.
And when I click when I do right,
click and go to properties will see that under security.
This file is owned by the systems,
and I have so and administrator.
So you see these two people here?
These are the group and a single user.
One person here it's just a user.
And again,
the system is a group.
So group system and administrator owned this file or folder called Video,
and the user who created that folder is I have so and you see at the bottom it tells you
whether that user has read,
write or secure herbal permission.
You could see right here.
It has all the permission that we talked about in our Lennox machine.
When we log into our Lennix machine again,
the first thing,
what we do,
you see who we are.
So we are ourself.
See what falls or directors we have.
These are all the listing off ours and directors we have now here in the 1st 2nd and hair
the third column.
The third column tells you who owns this file.
Let's say we go to Lisa.
We created this file Lisa and the person who owns this file,
Lisa is the user I've saw or yourself yourself.
In this case,
the four column right here is the group name in this case is IVs all again because I am
part off my own group.
I belonged to my own group.
I could change that to a different group.
But since I'm a regular user,
not a super user,
I won't be able to change that permission to any other group.
That Onley person or the only account that could change that.
Ah,
ownership is route.
So let's become route s you dash.
Once you log in,
you do P W d.
And here it will bring you into slash route.
Now remember,
you are not in your home.
Director,
You are in group director because you are route right now.
So I want you to go to your home directory.
Which is she remember slash home and slash or use the name.
It will take you to your home directory.
You could just to pwd to confirm and to a less minus.
Lt are to confirm it at the time that these are your directories and files.
If you wanted to change the permission off Lisa,
and you wanted to change it from yourself.
And you wanted to have this owned by route.
What you'll do is change own and you specify the name off the user.
You want to change too?
And the name off the file,
Lisa.
And then when you do a less myself to your you will see right here the file is now owned by
route.
You could also do just to be more Pacific so you don't see all of the files you do unless
myself,
Lisa,
and you'll see here.
Now the file is owned by route.
You could do the same thing when you do ch g r p,
which is to change the group.
You could do the group.
Also,
there's another group called Route,
and you could do Lisa again on ducal.
Verify it.
And now you'll see this file.
Lisa is owned by a route,
and in the group who owns this file is also route.
Now what happened when you become yourself again?
How do you get out of this route account?
You just simply type exit.
You're logged out and just confirm who you are.
You're yourself which directory or in your in your home directory?
Do ls minus lt.
Or And you see there is this fall,
Lisa.
Now what happens if you try to delete this fall?
Let's see.
RM Lisa,
it will tell you.
Remove right.
Protected regular off empty file.
If you say yes and duelist my cell tr There you go.
It is gone.
The reason it is gone now Why is Because And you go one step back to your home directory.
So your home is right now is sash homes like yourself?
And then you go one step back.
You are in Just sash home and do a less my cell.
Here,
you'll see the of salt directory,
which is your home directory has permission off yourself to read,
write and execute.
Meaning anything inside of the director you greed you could write and that you could
execute to,
regardless,
if whoever puts the file in whoever owns the file our,
um who whichever groups owns that you could go ahead and still deleted.
Now,
if you try to create a file in,
let's say at sea and you go touch test file,
it would tell you permission denied because you do not have permission to write to this
file.
How do you check that?
You do ls minus l slash.
You could do that or you could simply go to CD slash and do ls minus l.
And you'll see here is a list of all the directories that are inside of slash and the one
we were trying to go to is at sea.
If you notice it at sea is owned by route and the group is owned by route as well.
Now the route has the permission to write to it.
But what about the people who are in roots group?
They don't have a permission to write to it.
What about everybody else?
So that is why you cannot create ah file in at sea.
So let's let's say,
if you become root again,
okay?
And now you go to etc.
And you create a file touch test 123 It's verified.
A list minus L t r.
You see,
the bottom is your file.
Now another way.
What you could do is while we're working on this,
you can minimize this window and you could open another window by right clicking and clear
,
open Terminal said.
This way we have a regular account which is our account and the root account.
So there.
So if you don't have to exit out of a rule account So we are here.
I have solved which director of urine,
urine slash home and we created the filed in etc.
Right as a route.
So let's go to etc.
And let's see ls minus l to your.
And now we're going to try to remove this fall test 123 and it's gonna see it removed,
Right,
protected.
It's just a warning.
You said yes and it stills his permission denied.
Now why?
It's saying permission denied again.
You go to a CD slash name and you do ls minus l and you will see right here.
That's the at sea directory and it's tell you right here.
The Group three bets do not have write permission and the other three bits do not have
write permission as well.
So that's how you change these user of the files ownership and group ownerships that the
two commands that we learn is chief ownership,
which is C.
H o and w Sorry.
Ow!
And And the 2nd 1 has changed group so again really want you to do a man on each command
and go over the description,
The different options it has same thing you do with the with the second command as well.
And also,
I want you to practice this command by changing the permission Onley in your home directory
.
So your home directory is slash home slash yourself and you could try changing permission
to one of the directory,
like create a new fall.
Don't testify that you created and just see permission test file create this while and just
ah,
practice your change.
Um,
ownership and change group.
Ah,
command on this file and see how you could change it.